>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JANUARY 9: GERMANY
TOUGHENS ITS STANCE ON MIGRANTS
AND REFUGEES AS PROTESTERS TAKE
TO THE STREETS; WHITE HOUSE
OFFICIALS MEET WITH SILICON
VALLEY EXECUTIVES, SEEKING HELP
TO POLICE VIOLENT EXTREMISTS;
AND, A SURGE IN PAINKILLER AND
HEROIN ABUSE BY PREGNANT WOMEN
LEADS TO MORE AMERICAN BABIES
BORN GOING THROUGH DRUG
WITHDRAWAL.
>> IT'S A CATCH-22 ALL THE WAY.
YOU CAN'T GET OFF OF IT OR THE
BABY WILL DIE.
BUT IF YOU STAY ON IT, THE BABY
COULD GO THROUGH WITHDRAWAL.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GERMANY HAS ACCEPTED MORE THAN A
MILLION ASYLUM SEEKERS IN THE
PAST YEAR, AND TODAY ANTI-
IMMIGRANT SENTIMENT WAS ON
DISPLAY THERE IN RESPONSE TO NEW
YEAR'S EVE ASSAULTS ON WOMEN,
ALLEGEDLY BY MIGRANTS.
IN COLOGNE, GERMANY'S FOURTH
LARGEST CITY, HUNDREDS PROTESTED
AGAINST THE NEW MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES, WHO ARE MOSTLY FROM
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH
AFRICA.
POLICE DISPERSED CROWDS WITH
WATER CANNONS AFTER SOME
PROTESTERS THREW FIRECRACKERS
AND BEER BOTTLES AT OFFICERS.
THE PROTESTS FOLLOW REVELATIONS
THAT 120 WOMEN WERE ROBBED OR
GROPED AT THE MAIN TRAIN
STATION IN COLOGNE ON NEW YEARS
EVE.
THE CITY'S POLICE SAY THEY ARE
INVESTIGATING 379 COMPLAINTS,
INCLUDING TWO ALLEGED RAPES.
THE GERMAN GOVERNMENT HAS SAID
TWO-THIRDS OF SOME 30 SUSPECTS
QUESTIONED IN THE ATTACKS ARE
ASYLUM SEEKERS, BUT THE ALLEGED
OFFENDERS ALSO INCLUDE GERMAN
CITIZENS AND ONE AMERICAN.
IN RESPONSE TO THE MARAUDING,
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
ANNOUNCED TODAY ANY REFUGEES WHO
COMMIT CRIMES MAY LOSE THEIR
RIGHT TO ASYLUM.
>> (translated): WHAT HAPPENED
ON NEW YEAR'S EVE WERE
DESPICABLE CRIMINAL ACTS WHICH
CALL FOR DECISIVE ANSWERS.
THIS IS ABOUT WOMEN WHO WERE
VICTIMS OF SEXUAL ATTACKS.
OUR THOUGHTS ARE WITH THEM, AND,
NOW, OF COURSE, WE HAVE TO FACE
THESE NEW TASKS AND CHALLENGES.
>> Sreenivasan: IN A SEPARATE
PROTEST TODAY, ABOUT 2,000
GERMANS GATHERED OUTSIDE
COLOGNE'S MAIN CATHEDRAL TO
PROTEST VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.
FOR MORE ON THE MIGRANT PROTESTS
AND INVESTIGATION IN GERMANY,
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MALCOLM BRABANT JOINS ME NOW VIA
SKYPE FROM COLOGNE.
SO, TELL ME, YOU WERE AT THE
PROTEST TODAY, WHAT DID YOU SEE?
>> WELL, THIS IS THE PRETTY UGLY
SIDE OF GERMANY, IT HAS TO BE
SAID.
THERE WERE LOTS OF VERY ANGRY
RIGHT-WINGERS BELONGING TO THIS
ORGANIZATION CALLED PEGIDA,
WHICH IS A PAN-EUROPEAN
ORGANIZATION THAT WANTS TO
STOP WHAT IT SAYS IS THE
ISLAMIZATION OF EUROPE.
THESE SEXUAL ATTACKS ON WOMEN
IN COLOGNE AND OTHER GERMAN
CITIES REALLY HAVE ACTED AS A
CATALYST TO GENERATE SOME
SUPPORT FOR PEGIDA BECAUSE
THEIR INFLUENCE WAS ON THE WANE.
BUT THIS REALLY HAS GIVEN THEM A
LITTLE BIT MORE ENERGY FOR THEIR
CAMPAIGN.
THERE WERE RIGHT-WING LEADERS
FROM BRITAIN WHO CAME OVER TO
ADDRESS PEOPLE, AND SO THE WHOLE
DEMONSTRATION WAS IN A PRETTY
SORT OF RAUCOUS MOOD.
PEOPLE WERE DRINKING VERY
HEAVILY ON THE WAY THROUGH.
THE POLICE ALLOWED THEM TO
MARCH.
THEY DIDN'T GET TO THEIR
DESTINATION BECAUSE THERE WAS A
VERY AGGRESSIVE ATMOSPHERE.
BOTTLES STARTED BEING THROWN
TOWARDS THE POLICE LINES.
THE POLICE TOLD THEM TO
DISPERSE; THE PEGIDA PEOPLE
DIDN'T DO THAT, SO A WATER
CANNON WAS BROUGHT OUT AND THEY
FORCED THEM TO RETREAT BACK TO
THE STATION.
BUT THE ATMOSPHERE IN COLOGNE
REALLY HAS BEEN-- BECOME VERY
UNPLEASANT.
THESE PEOPLE WERE DEMANDING
ANGELA MERKEL SHOULD GO AND
CALLING HER A TRAITOR FOR WHAT
SHE HAD DONE TO BOTH GERMANY AND
EUROPE IN INVITING SO MANY
REFUGEES INTO THE CONTINENT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHAT ABOUT
THE AVERAGE CITIZENS YOU HAVE
SPOKEN TO IN THE LAST FEW DAYS?
>> WELL, I THINK PEOPLE ARE
EXTREMELY SHOCKED BY WHAT
HAPPENED, NOT JUST IN COLOGNE
BUT IN OTHER GERMAN CITIES.
IT WAS THE REAL SCALE OF THE
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.
AND I HAVE TO SAY THAT OVER THE
PAST DAY, THE GERMAN POLICE ARE
SAYING THAT THE NUMBER OF
COMPLAINTS THAT HAVE BEEN MADE
BY WOMEN HAVE APPROACHED NEARLY
300, NEARLY 400, AND MANY OF
THOSE ARE OF A SEXUAL NATURE.
AND THIS HAS REALLY SURPRISED
PEOPLE, AND SOME PEOPLE THINK
THAT, YOU KNOW, THEY HAVE BEEN
MISLED ABOUT THE NATURE OF THE
PEOPLE THAT THEY HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTING IN.
AND THERE ARE OTHERS WHO SAY
THAT THE PEOPLE WHO COMMITTED
THESE CRIMES ARE JUST A SMALL
MINORITY OF ORDINARY DECENT
PEOPLE WHO WANT TO HAVE A BETTER
LIFE.
BUT WHAT IS BEING DISCUSSED HERE
IS BASICALLY THAT COLOGNE MAY
POSSIBLY BE A TURNING POINT FOR
THE WHOLE SORT OF GERMAN
ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE MIGRATION
TRAIL, AND INDEED ANGELA MERKEL
HAS HAD TO RESPOND TO THAT TODAY
BY BEING AT A POLITICAL RALLY
SAYING THAT SHE IS GOING TO
BRING IN NEW LAWS WHICH WILL
MAKE DEPORTATIONS EASIER FOR
THOSE PEOPLE WHO ARE BREAKING
GERMAN LAWS.
AT THE MOMENT, PEOPLE HAVE TO
SERVE AT LEAST THREE YEARS'
IMPRISONMENT BEFORE THEY CAN BE
DEPORTED, BUT THERE IS A NEED
NOW, SOME GERMANS WOULD SAY, TO
ACCELERATE THAT PROCESS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NONE OF
THIS HAPPENED IN A POLITICAL
VACUUM.
>> NO.
AND PEOPLE ARE REALLY SORT OF
INTERESTED TO KNOW WHETHER OR
NOT ANGELA MERKEL-- WHAT HER
POLITICAL FUTURE IS LIKE
BECAUSE SHE HAS REALLY PUT
HERSELF OUT ON THE EXTREME OF
EUROPEAN OPINION BY OPENING UP
GERMANY TO VIRTUALLY ANYBODY NOW
AND SHE IS HAVING TO REVERSE
THAT PROCESS.
NOW, THE NUMBERS IN GERMANY ARE
QUITE STAGGERING; OVER THE PAST
YEAR, THE GERMANS SAY THEY HAVE
TAKEN IN MORE THAN A MILLION
MIGRANTS.
AND SOMEHOW THOSE FIGURES DON'T
REALLY QUITE JIBE BECAUSE THAT'S
ABOUT THE SAME AMOUNT OF PEOPLE
THAT OTHER COUNTRIES HAVE LET
IN.
SO PERHAPS THERE HAS BEEN SOME
DOUBLE REGISTRATION IN GERMANY
WHICH HAS BOOSTED THOSE NUMBERS,
BUT NEVERTHELESS THOSE NUMBERS
ARE PRETTY HIGH.
AND THERE IS A DEMOGRAPHIC
PROBLEM BECAUSE MANY OF THE
PEOPLE COMING INTO EUROPE FROM
TURKEY, THROUGH GREECE, ARE
YOUNG MEN, AND THEY, AS I FOUND
OUT YESTERDAY WHEN I TALKED TO
SOME MOROCCAN PEOPLE, THEY HAVE
GOT TO LEARN THERE IS A
COMPLETELY DIFFERENT WAY IN
EUROPE ABOUT THE WAY IN WHICH
YOU TREAT WOMEN.
AND PEOPLE ARE VERY CONCERNED
THAT THERE IS A SERIOUS CULTURAL
CLASH THAT IS HAPPENING BETWEEN
PEOPLE OF EUROPEAN SORT OF
BACKGROUND AND THOSE NEWCOMERS.
AND SO, COLOGNE COULD VERY WELL
BE A TURNING POINT.
>> Sreenivasan: SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM BRABENT
JOINING US VIA SKYPE, THANKS
SO MUCH.
THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT TOLD THE
UNITED NATIONS TODAY IT'S READY
TO TAKE PART IN PEACE TALKS
SCHEDULED LATER THIS MONTH IN
GENEVA, BUT IT WANTS TO KNOW
FIRST WHICH OPPOSITION GROUPS
WILL BE INVITED.
AN AIR STRIKE IN A REBEL-HELD
TOWN IN NORTHWEST SYRIA KILLED
AT LEAST 39 PEOPLE TODAY,
ACCORDING TO THE SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS.
BUT THE GROUP DID NOT SAY
WHETHER THE AIR STRIKE WAS
CARRIED OUT BY THE SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT OR RUSSIAN JETS.
RUSSIA HAS BEEN SUPPORTING
SYRIAN PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD
BY BOMBING ANTI-GOVERNMENT
FORCES SINCE SEPTEMBER.
AN UNNAMED SENIOR U.S. OFFICIAL
TOLD REPORTERS TODAY 70% OF
RUSSIANS AIR STRIKES HAVE STRUCK
ANTI-ASSAD REBELS, NOT
ISIS, WHICH IS THE TARGET OF A
U.S.-LED COALITION.
SYRIA'S FIVE-YEAR CIVIL WAR HAS
CLAIMED 250,000 LIVES.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE THAN A
YEAR, F.B.I. DIRECTOR JAMES
COMEY HAS ARGUED AMERICAN
TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES NEED TO DO
MORE TO HELP LAW ENFORCEMENT
COMBAT TERRORISTS EXPLOITING THE
INTERNET AND MOBILE DEVICES TO
PLAN PLOTS AND PUBLISH
PROPAGANDA.
FOR EXAMPLE, COMEY HAS SAID
ENCRYPTION ON SMARTPHONES MAKES
IT HARDER TO MONITOR
COMMUNICATIONS BY SUSPECTS UNDER
INVESTIGATION.
THE COMPANIES DEFEND ENCRYPTION
AS A PRIVACY TOOL FOR ALL
CUSTOMERS.
YESTERDAY, COMEY, THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL, THE WHITE HOUSE
COUNTERTERRORISM ADVISER AND
OTHER OFFICIALS WENT TO SILICON
VALLEY TO SEEK COMMON GROUND.
JOINING ME NOW FROM LOS ANGELES
TO DISCUSS THIS SUMMIT IS DAWN
CHMIELEWSKI.
SHE'S A REPORTER FOR THE TECH
NEWS WEB SITE RE/CODE.
SO, WHAT DO THEY TALK ABOUT?
OBVIOUSLY, THE ENCRYPTION THING
IS FRONT AND CENTER ON THE
TABLE.
IS THIS THE "AGREE TO DISAGREE"
TYPE OF CONVERSATION?
>> THIS IS THE "LET'S ALL COME
TOGETHER AND TACKLE AN
INCREDIBLY HARD AND DEADLY
PROBLEM."
LOOK, ENCRYPTION WAS A PART OF
THE CONVERSATION BUT I AM TOLD
THAT IT WAS NOT THE MAIN-- THE
MAIN FOCUS OF THE DISCUSSION,
WHICH TOOK PLACE OVER THE COURSE
OF TWO HOURS IN AN UNDISCLOSED
LOCATION IN SAN JOSE.
WHAT I AM TOLD IS THAT THE
GOVERNMENT WANTED TO TAKE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO MEET WITH
EXECUTIVES IN SILICON VALLEY TO
SORT OF LAY OUT THE SCOPE OF
THE PROBLEM, AND HOW ISIS AND
OTHER EXTREMISTS ARE USING
SOCIAL NETWORKS AND ENCRYPTION
TO TRY TO RECRUIT MEMBERS AND
IMMOBILIZE-- MOBILIZE PEOPLE
INTO COMMITTING ATTACKS AGAINST
THE COUNTRY.
I THINK THERE WAS MUCH TIME
DEVOTED TO CREATING A COMMON
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT THE
PROBLEM WAS, AND THEN TALK FIRST
ABOUT HOW THE GOVERNMENT WAS
TRYING TO PUT ITS OWN HOUSE IN
ORDER BECAUSE OBVIOUSLY WE HAD
THE RECENT ATTACK IN SAN
BERNARDINO THAT THE GOVERNMENT
WAS NOT AWARE OF, SO IT IS
TRYING TO GET ITS OWN HOUSE IN
ORDER FIRST.
>> Sreenivasan: WHO WAS AT THE
MEETING FROM THE TECH SIDE?
>> SO WE UNDERSTAND THAT SHERYL
SANDBERG WAS THERE, THE CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF FACEBOOK.
AND ALSO TIM COOK, APPLE'S CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER.
AND THERE WAS SOME DISCUSSION
ABOUT HOW FACEBOOK ACTUALLY IS--
DEALS WITH VIOLENT THREATS THAT
ARE MADE ON ITS PLATFORM.
REMEMBER, FACEBOOK REACHES MORE
THAN A BILLION PEOPLE AROUND THE
WORLD, AND IT TRIES TO BE REALLY
DILIGENT IN DEALING WITH THREATS
OR THREATS OF VIOLENCE, WHEN
PEOPLE USE ITS PLATFORM FOR
THAT.
BUT IT'S TRIED TO FIGURE OUT HOW
TO MANAGE THAT AND NOT, NOT ACT
AS A CENSOR, NOT TRY TO, NOT
PROACTIVELY GO OUT TO TAKE
THINGS DOWN UNTIL IT IS REPORTED
BY USERS AS BEING ABUSIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO YOU HAVE
TIM COOK FROM APPLE, AND SHERYL
SANDBERG FROM FACEBOOK, AND
YOU HAVE THESE TECH HEAVYWEIGHTS
AND REALLY ON THE ADMINISTRATION
SIDE OF THE TABLE THEY HAVE SOME
STREET CRED WITH THE PEOPLE ON
THEIR SIDE AS WELL.
>> YES, EXACTLY, MEGAN SMITH,
THE NATION'S CHIEF TECHNOLOGY
OFFICER CAME FROM GOOGLE; SHE
RAN A NUMBER OF UNITS AT GOOGLE
AND HAS SOME SERIOUS CRED, AND
OTHER EXECUTIVES FROM TWITTER,
LONG-TIME EXECUTIVES WITH
TWITTER FROM PRINCETON WHO IS
REALLY WELL REGARDED WITHIN THE
TECH COMMUNITY AS SOMEONE WHO
IS KNOWLEDGEABLE ABOUT PRIVACY
AND OTHER ISSUES.
SO THESE ARE SOME PRETTY HEAVY
HITTERS WHO ARE ALSO AT THE
TABLE AND SPEAK SILICON VALLEY'S
LANGUAGE, AND THE GOAL HERE AT
THIS MEETING WAS TO TRY TO FIND
SOME COMMON GROUND IN AN ISSUE
THAT IS REALLY CONTENTIOUS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
DAWN CHMIELEWSKI FROM THE
WEB SITE RE/CODE, THANKS SO MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ABUSE OF
PAINKILLERS DERIVED FROM DRUGS
CALLED OPIOIDS IS AN EPIDEMIC
THAT LEADS TO 44 OVERDOSE DEATHS
EVERY DAY IN THE UNITED STATES,
ACCORDING TO THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.
THE C.D.C. ALSO SAYS WOMEN ARE
ABUSING AND OVERDOSING ON THESE
PAINKILLERS AT ALARMING RATES,
AND MANY ADDICTED WOMEN WIND UP
TAKING HEROIN, WHICH IS ALSO AN
OPIOID.
WOMEN WHO ARE PREGNANT ARE AMONG
THESE DRUG USERS, AND AS A
RESULT, A GROWING NUMBER OF
AMERICAN BABIES GO THROUGH DRUG
WITHDRAWAL FROM THE MOMENT THEY
ARE BORN.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT ALISON
STEWART LOOKS AT THE CHALLENGES
FOR PREGNANT WOMEN STRUGGLING
WITH OPIOID ADDICTION.
>> Reporter: IN MANY WAYS,
SHEENA IS A TYPICAL 30-YEAR-OLD
NORTH CAROLINA MOM.
SHE SPENDS A GOOD PART OF HER
DAY SHUTTLING AROUND HER TWO
BOYS, FIVE-YEAR-OLD KIEFER TO
KINDERGARTEN...
>> BYE, I LOVE YOU!
>> Reporter: ...AND 18-MONTH-OLD
ROHAN TO DAY CARE.
BUT ANOTHER PART OF SHEENA'S
ROUTINE IS GOING TO THE HORIZONS
CLINIC AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
NORTH CAROLINA IN CHAPEL HILL
FOR A URINE DRUG TEST.
>> HEY, SHEENA, WHAT'S GOING ON?
>> COMING TO PEE!
>> Reporter: HOW MANY TIMES DO
YOU HAVE TO GO GET DRUG TESTED?
>> RIGHT NOW, IT'S THREE TIMES A
WEEK.
>> Reporter: YOU GO TAKE A DRUG
TEST, AND YOU PICK UP YOUR SON.
>> YEP.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S JUST THE
WAY LIFE IS RIGHT NOW.
>> OH, YEAH.
>> Reporter: SHEENA IS
RECOVERING FROM AN 11-YEAR
ADDICTION TO OPIOIDS THAT
INCLUDED PAINKILLERS AND HEROIN.
WE AGREED NOT TO USE HER LAST
NAME.
SHE NOW ATTENDS CLASSES AND
THERAPY SESSIONS THAT HELP HER
STAY CLEAN, AND HER DAILY
REGIMEN INCLUDES TAKING
MEDICATION TO PREVENT
WITHDRAWAL.
>> IF I WERE TO NOT TAKE IT, IT
STARTS TO QUICKLY INCREASE IN
GETTING WORSE, THE WITHDRAWAL
SYMPTOMS.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS HER OLDER
BROTHER INTRODUCED HER TO
OPIOIDS WHEN SHE WAS 17.
>> HE HAD GOTTEN SOME PAIN
PILLS, PAINKILLERS, FROM OUR
GRANDFATHER, AND I LOVED THE WAY
IT MADE ME FEEL.
I WAS HAPPY.
THE TIME FLEW BY.
>> Reporter: IN HER EARLY 20s,
SHEENA SAYS SHE STOPPED USING
OPIOIDS WHEN SHE MET HER
BOYFRIEND.
AT 24, SHE BECAME PREGNANT.
AND DURING A DIFFICULT
CHILDBIRTH SHE WAS GIVEN
INTRAVENOUS FENTANYL, AN OPIOID
PAINKILLER, BY A DOCTOR WHO
DIDN'T KNOW ABOUT HER ADDICTION.
DISCHARGED WITH A PRESCRIPTION
FOR ANOTHER OPIOID PAINKILLER,
PERCOCET, SHE RELAPSED.
SHEENA CONTINUED USING OPIOIDS
FOR THE NEXT THREE AND A HALF
YEARS, EVEN WHEN SHE AND HER
BOYFRIEND FOUND OUT SHE WAS
PREGNANT AGAIN.
SO, YOU WERE ACTIVELY ADDICTED
WHEN YOU BECAME PREGNANT WITH
YOUR SECOND SON?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: DID YOU USE WHILE
YOU WERE PREGNANT?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: HOW OFTEN?
>> EVERY DAY.
JUST TO GET OUT OF BED I HAD TO
HAVE OPIATES.
I WAS JUST IN A PLACE OF
COMPLETE SELF-HATE.
I HATED MYSELF.
>> Reporter: ALMOST FIVE MONTHS
PREGNANT, SHEENA WENT TO SEE
ELISABETH JOHNSON AT HORIZONS,
WHICH USED TO TREAT MOSTLY
COCAINE ABUSE IN PREGNANT WOMEN.
NOW, IT'S ALMOST ALL OPIOID
ABUSE.
>> WERE YOU TAKING PRESCRIPTION
PILLS?
>> YEAH.
>> WERE YOU BUYING THEM MOSTLY?
>> AND SOMETIMES I WAS USING
HEROIN BECAUSE IT WAS CHEAPER.
>> Reporter: JOHNSON PREVIOUSLY
WORKED FOR A PAIN CLINIC AND HAS
SEEN FIRSTHAND THE EFFECTS OF
POWERFUL OPIOIDS LIKE OXYCODONE.
THEY HAVE BEEN INCREASINGLY
PRESCRIBED OVER THE PAST 15
YEARS AS DOCTORS BEGAN TREATING
PAIN MORE AGGRESSIVELY.
IS IT QUITE SIMPLY EASIER TO GET
OPIOIDS NOW THAN IT USED TO BE?
>> I THINK THAT IT IS IN THAT
THEY HAVE BEEN PRESCRIBED SO
OFTEN.
THERE IS PLENTY OF EVIDENCE IN
THE LITERATURE THAT WOMEN ARE
FAR MORE LIKELY THAN MEN TO
BE GIVEN PRESCRIPTIONS FOR
OPIOIDS FOR CHRONIC PAIN
CONDITIONS, SO I DO THINK THAT A
LOT OF IT STARTS IN A VERY WELL-
MEANING PRIMARY CARE OFFICE OR
PAIN PROVIDER'S OFFICE.
>> Reporter: EACH YEAR BETWEEN
2008 AND 2012, ON AVERAGE, MORE
THAN ONE-QUARTER OF REPRODUCTIVE
AGE WOMEN WITH PRIVATE
INSURANCE-- AND MORE THAN ONE-
THIRD OF THOSE ENROLLED IN
MEDICAID-- FILLED A PRESCRIPTION
FOR OPIOID PAINKILLERS.
IN 2014, 4.8 MILLION WOMEN
REPORTED NON-MEDICAL OR ILLICIT
USE OF PRESCRIPTION OPIOIDS.
AND THE NUMBER OF PREGNANT WOMEN
RECEIVING TREATMENT FOR OPIOID
ABUSE MORE THAN DOUBLED BETWEEN
2000 AND 2012.
APRIL, WHO LIVES IN TENNESSEE,
IS ONE OF THOSE WOMEN.
SHE DIDN'T WANT US TO USE HER
LAST NAME OR SHOW HER FACE TO
PROTECT HER FAMILY'S PRIVACY.
>> WHEN YOU'RE AN ADDICT, ALL
YOU CAN THINK ABOUT IS GETTING
THAT DRUG, GETTING THAT
MEDICINE, GETTING THAT RELIEF.
>> Reporter: WHAT BEGAN WITH A
LEGITIMATE PRESCRIPTION FOR PAIN
FOLLOWING A CAR ACCIDENT QUICKLY
SLIPPED INTO ABUSE.
>> I KNEW I HAD CROSSED THE LINE
WHEN I STARTED RUNNING OUT OF
THEM, A COUPLE DAYS BEFORE MY
PRESCRIPTION WAS SUPPOSED TO BE
GONE.
THEN, I FOUND WAYS TO GET THEM
WITHOUT A PRESCRIPTION.
>> Reporter: DID YOU GO DOCTOR
SHOPPING AT ALL?
>> IF I DIDN'T HAVE A DOCTOR AND
I HAD A PAIN FLARE-UP, I WOULD
GO TO AN E.R.
I ACCRUED TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
DOLLARS IN BILLS.
>> Reporter: EVENTUALLY, WHEN
APRIL TRIED TO GET MORE
PAINKILLERS, A DOCTOR CHECKED A
STATE DATABASE THAT TRACKS
PRESCRIPTION USE AND CONFRONTED
HER.
SHE GOT INTO TREATMENT.
NOW, AT 32, SHE'S PREGNANT AND
ATTENDS A CLINIC FOR PREGNANT
OPIOID USERS.
DR. JESSICA YOUNG STARTED IT
FOUR YEARS AGO AT VANDERBILT
UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER.
YOUNG ESTIMATES TWO-THIRDS OF
HER PATIENTS ARE LIKE APRIL,
WHOSE ADDICTION STARTED WITH A
PRESCRIPTION FOR PAIN.
WHEN YOU HAVE A WOMAN COME IN
WHO IS ADDICTED TO AN OPIOID AND
IS PREGNANT, WHAT KIND OF
QUESTIONS DO THEY USUALLY HAVE
FOR YOU?
>> ONE OF THE FIRST THINGS IS,
"WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO MY BABY?"
AND THEY ARE SO AFRAID OF BABY
HAVING ANY PROBLEMS AFTER
DELIVERY.
AND THEY WANT TO KNOW THAT THEY
ARE DOING WHATEVER THEY CAN TO
GET TREATMENT IN A SAFE WAY, IN
THE SAFEST WAY POSSIBLE FOR
BABY.
>> Reporter: INFANTS EXPOSED TO
AN OPIOID TAKEN BY THEIR MOTHERS
DURING PREGNANCY CAN BE BECOME
DEPENDENT ON THE DRUG IN UTERO
AND BE BORN GOING THROUGH
WITHDRAWAL.
THE CONDITION IS CALLED NEONATAL
ABSTINENCE SYNDROME, OR N.A.S.
DR. STEPHEN PATRICK IS ONE OF
THE TOP N.A.S. RESEARCHERS AND
WORKS IN VANDERBILT'S NEONATAL
INTENSIVE CARE UNIT, OR NICU.
>> WE BEGAN TO SEE MORE AND MORE
INFANTS WITH NEONATAL ABSTINENCE
SYNDROME IN OUR NICU AND
BEGAN TO WONDER, "IS THIS
BECOMING A PROBLEM EVERYWHERE?"
>> Reporter: IN A STUDY
PUBLISHED LAST YEAR, PATRICK
FOUND A NEARLY FIVEFOLD INCREASE
BETWEEN 2000 AND 2012 IN THE
NUMBER OF BABIES BORN WITH
N.A.S. IN THE UNITED STATES.
>> HERE IN TENNESSEE AND IN THE
SURROUNDING STATES, WE HAVE A
RATE THAT'S ABOUT THREE TIMES
THE NATIONAL AVERAGE, ABOUT 16.1
PER THOUSAND BIRTHS, COMPARED TO
THE NATIONAL AVERAGE, WHICH IS
ABOUT 5.8 PER THOUSAND BIRTHS.
>> Reporter: WHY IS THAT?
>> IT'S LINKED PRETTY HEAVILY TO
PRESCRIBING, TO OPIOID
PRESCRIBING.
WE KNOW THAT ABOUT 80% OF THE
CASES OF NEONATAL ABSTINENCE
SYNDROME IN TENNESSEE, YOU KNOW,
HAVE A PRESCRIPTION WRITTEN FOR
AN OPIOID.
>> Reporter: ARE PEOPLE WRITING
MORE PRESCRIPTIONS IN TENNESSEE
THAN OTHER PARTS OF THE COUNTRY?
>> YES.
TENNESSEE HAS THE SECOND-HIGHEST
RATE OF OPIOID PRESCRIBING IN
THE U.S.
>> Reporter: AT EAST TENNESSEE
CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL, NURSE
HEATHER MISHLICK TAKES CARE OF
THESE NEWBORNS.
>> TYPICALLY, N.A.S. BABIES COME
IN AND THEY'RE SCREAMING
UNCONTROLLABLY.
>> I'M GOING TO PICK HIM UP.
>> Reporter: N.A.S. BABIES NEED
A LOT OF SKIN-TO-SKIN CONTACT TO
BE SOOTHED AND ARE KEPT IN DIMLY
LIT ROOMS TO PREVENT
OVERSTIMULATION.
THAT'S NOT ALWAYS ENOUGH.
SOMETIMES N.A.S. BABIES MUST BE
GIVEN A LOW DOSAGE OF AN OPIOID
LIKE MORPHINE TO WEAN THEM OFF
THE DRUG.
>> AND WHAT WE DO IS, WE CONTROL
THE SYMPTOMS.
WE MAKE THE INFANT MORE
COMFORTABLE, AND WE DO REDUCE
THE RISK OF HAVING COMPLICATIONS
LIKE SEIZURES.
AND WE SLOWLY DECREASE THAT DOSE
OVER A PERIOD OF TIME.
>> Reporter: THEIR MOTHERS ARE
PUT ON A SIMILAR TREATMENT WHILE
PREGNANT.
IT'S CALLED "MAINTENANCE
THERAPY," A CONSISTENT DOSE OF A
SAFER OPIOID LIKE THE MEDICATION
SUBOXONE.
DR. YOUNG SAYS THOSE MEDICATIONS
KEEP A MOM STABLE.
>> MAINTENANCE THERAPY IS A LOT
ABOUT HARM REDUCTION, AND THE
MISCONCEPTION IS THAT IT'S
SUBSTITUTING ONE DRUG FOR
ANOTHER.
BUT IF MAINTENANCE THERAPY IS
DONE APPROPRIATELY, MOMS AREN'T
GETTING HIGH FROM THE
MEDICATION; THEY'RE FUNCTIONING
NORMALLY.
>> Reporter: NEWBORNS OF WOMEN
IN OPIOID MAINTENANCE THERAPY
CAN STILL GO THROUGH WITHDRAWAL,
BUT DR. YOUNG EMPHASIZES THAT IF
AN ADDICTED MOTHER-TO-BE TRIES
TO QUIT OPIOIDS COLD TURKEY,
THAT CAN JEOPARDIZE THE
PREGNANCY.
>> IT CAN CAUSE MISCARRIAGE.
IT CAN CAUSE PRE-TERM LABOR.
WE DON'T WANT MOMS DELIVERING
EARLY BECAUSE OF ALL THE
COMPLICATIONS THAT THAT CAN
CAUSE.
>> Reporter: APRIL HAS BEEN ON
SUBOXONE THROUGHOUT HER
PREGNANCY.
>> IT'S A CATCH-22 ALL THE WAY.
YOU CAN'T GET OFF OF IT OR THEN
THE BABY WILL DIE.
BUT IF YOU STAY ON IT, THE BABY
COULD GO THROUGH WITHDRAWAL.
IT'S JUST SCARY, NOT TO MENTION
THAT THE LAWS THAT ARE COMING
OUT THAT ARE CRIMINALIZING WOMEN
FOR WHEN THEIR BABIES ARE BORN,
GOING THROUGH WITHDRAWALS.
>> Reporter: IF A BABY IN
TENNESSEE IS BORN DEPENDENT ON
DRUGS, THE MOTHER CAN BE CHARGED
WITH AGGRAVATED ASSAULT UNLESS
SHE CAN PROVE SHE IS ACTIVELY
SEEKING TREATMENT.
TENNESSEE HAS BROUGHT CHARGES
AGAINST AT LEAST 28 WOMEN UNDER
THE NEW LAW.
SPONSORS OF THE LAW SAY IT'S NOT
MEANT TO PENALIZE WOMEN BUT TO
GET THEM INTO TREATMENT AND
PROTECT THE WELFARE OF THEIR
BABIES.
DR. YOUNG BELIEVES THE LAW
DISCOURAGES WOMEN FROM GETTING
TREATMENT.
>> WHAT MANY OF MY PATIENTS TELL
ME IS THAT THEY SPENT MANY WEEKS
AND MONTHS TRYING TO WEAN
THEMSELVES OR TAPER THEMSELVES
OFF OF THESE DRUGS AT HOME
WITHOUT ANY MEDICAL INTERVENTION
BECAUSE THEY WERE AFRAID OF
WHATEVER POSSIBLE LEGAL
REPERCUSSIONS THERE COULD BE.
>> Reporter: THERE ARE SO FEW
PROGRAMS LIKE THE ONES AT
VANDERBILT AND U.N.C. THAT OFFER
TREATMENT AND PRENATAL CARE TO
PREGNANT ADDICTS, SO THE WOMEN
OFTEN END UP ON WAITING LISTS.
>> WITH ADDICTION DOWN THERE,
THOUGH, THEY REALLY DON'T
UNDERSTAND.
THERE'S NO REHABS, THERE'S NO
PLACES LIKE THIS.
>> Reporter: AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF NORTH CAROLINA HORIZON'S
CLINIC, ELISABETH JOHNSON SAYS
ON AVERAGE HER PATIENTS DRIVE AN
HOUR, MOSTLY FROM RURAL
COMMUNITIES, TO SEE HER.
LOGISTICS ARE COMPOUNDED BY
SHAME AND STIGMA, WHICH JOHNSON
SAYS ARE HURDLES FOR GETTING
PREGNANT OPIOID ADDICTS INTO
TREATMENT.
AFTER SEVERAL MONTHS OF
MAINTENANCE THERAPY WITH THE
MEDICATION SUBOXONE, SHEENA HAD
HER SECOND SON, ROHAN.
HE WAS BORN WITH N.A.S. AND
HOSPITALIZED FOR THREE WEEKS.
>> HE SOUNDED LIKE HE WAS IN
PAIN.
WHAT WAS REALLY HARD WAS KNOWING
WHAT HE WAS GOING THROUGH,
BECAUSE I FELT IT BEFORE.
HE WAS SICK.
HE WAS WITHDRAWING OFF THE
MEDICINE I WAS TAKING.
>> Reporter: THERE'S NOT ENOUGH
RESEARCH TO KNOW IF THERE ARE
ANY LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF N.A.S.
ON A CHILD.
>> DO YOU WANT TO GET OUT THE
BLUEBERRIES OR THE CARROTS?
>> Reporter: SHEENA SAYS THE
HORIZONS PROGRAM SAVED HER LIFE
AND HER SONS.
THEIR FATHER WAS NOT AS
FORTUNATE; HE DIED OF AN
OVERDOSE LAST YEAR.
AFTER NEARLY TWO YEARS IN
RECOVERY, SHEENA LOOKS FORWARD
TO A DAY WHEN SHE WILL NO LONGER
NEED TO TAKE A MEDICATION TO
FEEL NORMAL.
>> I LOOK AROUND ME, AND I'M
JUST SO GRATEFUL, YOU KNOW.
I'VE COME SO TREMENDOUSLY FAR.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW IS NEW
HAMPSHIRE TACKLING THE STATE'S
HEROIN CRISIS, AND HOW ARE THE
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES WEIGHING
IN?
WATCH OUR REPORT ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S. NAVY
SAYS IRAN FIRED ROCKETS IN THE
VICINITY OF U.S. SHIPS
PATROLLING THE PERSIAN GULF ON
DECEMBER 26.
TODAY, THE NAVY RELEASED 45
SECONDS OF BLACK AND WHITE
FOOTAGE OF THE INCIDENT,
VIDEOTAPED BY A U.S. HELICOPTER.
THE NAVY SAYS THE VIDEO SHOWS
SMALL IRANIAN BOATS THAT FIRED
THE ROCKETS AS AN OIL TANKER
PASSED BY.
THE INCIDENT OCCURRED TWO WEEKS
AGO IN THE STRAIT OF HORMUZ, AN
IMPORTANT SHIPPING LANE BETWEEN
IRAN AND THE GULF NATION OF
OMAN.
THERE'S BEEN NO COMMENT FROM
IRAN.
A.P. AND REUTERS ARE REPORTING
MEXICO IS WILLING TO EXTRADITE
MEXICAN DRUG CARTEL LEADER
JOAQUIN "EL CHAPO" GUZMAN TO THE
UNITED STATES.
THE U.S. WANTS HIM TO FACE
CHARGES FOR TRAFFICKING COCAINE,
HEROIN, METHAMPHETAMINE AND
MARIJUANA.
MEXICAN AUTHORITIES HAVE BROUGHT
GUZMAN BACK TO THE PRISON HE
ESCAPED SIX MONTHS AGO,
FOLLOWING HIS CAPTURE YESTERDAY.
THE ESCAPE WAS THROUGH AN
UNDERGROUND TUNNEL, GUZMAN'S
SECOND PRISON BREAK IN 14 YEARS.
MEXICO'S ATTORNEY GENERAL SAID
GUZMAN'S CONTACTS TO HOLLYWOOD
PRODUCERS TO MAKE A MOVIE ABOUT
HIS LIFE HELPED POLICE LOCATE
HIM.
IN THE PHILIPPINES TODAY,
SEVERAL MILLION PEOPLE TURNED
OUT FOR A CATHOLIC RITUAL.
THE ANNUAL PROCESSION OF THE
BLACK NAZARENE FEATURES A 400-
YEAR-OLD WOODEN STATUE OF JESUS
PULLED ON A CARRIAGE FOR FOUR
MILES THROUGH THE STREETS OF
MANILA.
LEGEND HAS IT THAT THE STATUE
SURVIVED A FIRE ABOARD THE SHIP
THAT BROUGHT IT FROM MEXICO TO
MANILA IN THE 17th CENTURY.
NEARLY A THOUSAND DEVOTEES WERE
INJURED JOSTLING TO TOUCH THE
STATUE WITH WHITE TOWELS.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SUNDAY:
A LOOK AT THE OLDEST VOLUNTARY
SCHOOL DESEGREGATION PROGRAM IN
THE COUNTRY.
>> THAT'S THE KEY, THAT IT'S
VOLUNTARY-- NO COURT MANDATES,
THAT THE SUBURBAN DISTRICTS THAT
ARE PARTICIPATING ARE DOING SO
BECAUSE THEY SEE THE BENEFIT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY,
THE LARGEST LOTTERY JACKPOT IN
U.S. HISTORY IS UP FOR GRABS IN
TONIGHT'S POWERBALL DRAWING:
$900 MILLION.
THE PRIZE STARTED AT $40 MILLION
IN NOVEMBER AND HAS GROWN WITH
STEADY TICKET SALES WITH NO
WINNER IN THE TWICE-WEEKLY
DRAWING.
A $2 TICKET GIVES YOU A ONE-IN-
292 MILLION CHANCE AT MATCHING
THE NUMBERS ON FIVE WHITE BALLS
AND THE RED POWER BALL.
GOOD LUCK.
A $900 MILLION PRIZE WILL BE
PAID IN 30 ANNUAL INSTALLMENTS
OF $30 MILLION OR IN A LUMP SUM
OF $558 MILLION BEFORE TAXES.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I AM HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.